#summary SAX-JAVA Binding Made Easier
#labels SAX,JAVA,BINDING

the package `jlibs.xml.sax.binding` contains classes which help you to read xml and create java objects.

===Concepts===
Before going into details, we will first go through the concepts. Then it will be easier to understand the code.

we have employee.xml:
{{{
<employee>                     
    <name>scott</name>         
    <age>20</age>              
    <experience>5</experience> 
</employee>
}}}
and Employee class:
{{{
public class Employee{
    private String name;
    private int age;
    private int experience;

    // getter and setter methods
}
}}}

Each element in xml will create a java object.
Let us see the java objects created for above xml:
{{{
        XML                     |     Java Object  
--------------------------------|-----------------
<employee>                      |   new Employee()
    <name>scott</name>          |   new String(#text) 
    <age>20</age>               |   new String(#text) 
    <experience>5</experience>  |   new String(#text) 
</employee>                     |
}}}
From above table you can see that:
 * `<employe/>` element create new `Employee` object<br>
 * `<name/>`, `<age/>` and `<experience/>` elements create `String` objects with their text content(i.e `#text`)

Now we have 4 java Objects ( one `Employee` object and four `String` objects)

Now *relation* comes into picture. Each element has a relation which tells how to relate current element's java object with parent element's java oject.

{{{
        XML                     |     Java Object             |   Relation
--------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------
<employee>                      |   emp = new Employee()      |   - No Relation -
    <name>scott</name>          |   name = new String(#text)  | emp.setName(name)
    <age>20</age>               |   age = new String(#text)   | emp.setAge(age)
    <experience>5</experience>  |   exp = new String(#text)   | emp.setExperience(exp)
</employee>                     |
}}}

The above table shows how java objects created are related with each other.<br>
To make understanding easier, we assigned each java object created into some variable.
 * `Employee` object created is assigned to `emp` variable
 * `String` created for `<name>` element is assigned to `name` variable
 * `String` created for `<age>` element is assigned to `age` variable
 * `String` created for `<experience>` element is assigned to `exp` variable

Now you can see that relation of `<name>` element and its parent element `<employee>` in java is:
{{{
emp.setName(name)
}}}
Once Java-Object and Relation are defined for each element type, It is piece of cake to read xml document into java objects.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

===Implementing Binding===
{{{
import jlibs.xml.sax.binding.*;

@Binding("employee")
public class EmployeeBinding{
    @Binding.Start
    public static Employee onStart() throws SAXException{
        return new Employee();
    }

    @Binding.Text({"name", "age", "experience"})
    public static String onText(String text){
        return text;
    }

    @Relation.Finish("name")
    public static void relateName(Employee employee, String name){
        employee.setName(name);
    }

    @Relation.Finish("age")
    public static void relateAge(Employee employee, String age){
        employee.setAge(Integer.parseInt(age));
    }

    @Relation.Finish("experience")
    public static void relateExperience(Employee employee, String experience){
        employee.setExperience(Integer.parseInt(experience));
    }
}
}}}

Let us walk through the code:

{{{
import jlibs.xml.sax.binding.*;
}}}
package `jlibs.xml.sax.binding` contains various annotations, which we use to define binding.

{{{
@Binding("employee")
public class EmployeeBinding{
}}}
`@Binding("employee")` annotation says that, `EmployeeBinding` class defines binding for `<employee>` element

{{{
@Binding.Start
public static Employee onStart() throws SAXException{
    return new Employee();
}
}}}
`@Binding.Start` annotation says that, when `<employee>` element starts call this method.<br>
this method returns new `Employee` object. i.e for each `<employee>` we create an `Employee` object.

{{{
@Binding.Text({"name", "age", "experience"})
public static String onText(String text){
    return text;
}
}}}
`@Binding.Text({"name", "age", "experience"})` annotation says that, call this method for `<name>`, `<age>` and `<employee>` text content.<br>
The argument `text` will be the text content of that element. The java object created for these elements is their text
content, so we simply return the `text` argument.

{{{
@Relation.Finish("name")
public static void relateName(Employee employee, String name){
    employee.setName(name);
}
}}}
`@Relation.Finish("name")` annotation says that, call this method on `<name>` element end.<br>
The first argument will be the java object created for `<name>`'s parent element (i,e `<employee>` element), which is `Employee` object created by `onStart()` method.<br>
The second argument will be the java object created for `<name>` element, which is `String` object created by `onText(...)` method.

similarly `relateAge(...)` and `relateExperience(...)` are called on `<age>` and `<experience>` element end respectively.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

===SAX Parsing===
Now we have finished coding `EmployeeBinding`. Now let us see how to read employee xml document using this binding.
{{{
public static Employee read(File xmlFile) throws Exception{
    BindingHandler handler = new BindingHandler(EmployeeBinding.class);
    return (Employee)handler.parse(new InputSource(xmlFile.getPath()));
}
}}}

`BindingHandler` is an implementation of SAX `DefaultHandler`. It's constructor takes the binding calss as argument.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

===Behind the Scene===

Let us see what happens behind the scene.

All the annoations we have used have `RetentionPolicy.SOURCE`(except `@Binding`). i.e These annotations are not available at runtime.<br>
`JLibs` comes with an [http://code.google.com/p/jlibs/source/browse/trunk/xml/src/jlibs/xml/sax/binding/BindingAnnotationProcessor.java annotation processor], 
which processes these annotations at compile time.<br>
This processor generates a class for each class with `@Binding` annotation.<br>
This generated class defines the [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/State_diagram state diagram] for the binding.

for example when you compile `EmployeeBinding` class, you will get an additional class `EmployeeBindingImpl` generated.

`BindingHandler` is a SAX `DefaultHandler` which implements a [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Finite-state_machine state machine].

Because reflection is not used at runtime, the sax parsing will be faster.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
===Unexpected Elements=====

let us say employee.xml is:
{{{
<employee>                     
    <name>scott</name>         
    <age>20</age>              
    <experience>5</experience> 
    <email>scott@email.com</email> 
</employee>
}}}
The above xml document has an unexpected element `<email>` for which we have not defined any binding.

When you read the above xml document using `EmployeeBinding`, it simply ignores the undefinded element `<email>`.<br>
i.e you will be able to create `Employee` object from the above xml document without any errors.

Suppose you want to issue an error for undefined elements then do:
{{{
handler.setIgnoreUnresolved(false); // default is true
}}}

now when you try to read the above xml document, you will get following exception:
{{{
org.xml.sax.SAXException: can't find binding for /employee/email (line=5, col=12)
}}}
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
===Reusing Bindings===

Have a look at `Company` class:
{{{
public class Company{
    private String name;
    private Employee manager;
    public List<Employee> employees = new ArrayList<Employee>();
    
    // getter and setter methods
}
}}}

and company.xml as below:
{{{
        XML                        |     Java Object                   |   Relation
-----------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------
<company name="foo">               | company = new Company(@name)      |
    <manager>                      | manager = /*use EmployeeBinding*/ |
        <name>admin</name>         |                                   |
        <age>30</age>              |                                   |
        <experience>7</experience> |                                   |
    </manager>                     |                                   | company.setManager(manager)
    <employee>                     | employee = /*use EmployeeBinding*/|
        <name>scott</name>         |                                   |
        <age>20</age>              |                                   |
        <experience>5</experience> |                                   |
    </employee>                    |                                   | company.addEmployee(employee)
    <employee>                     | employee = /*use EmployeeBinding*/|
        <name>alice</name>         |                                   |
        <age>21</age>              |                                   |
        <experience>4</experience> |                                   |
    </employee>                    |                                   | company.addEmployee(employee)
</company>                         |                                   |
}}}

on `<company>` element begin, we create `Company` object.<br>
for `<manager>` and `<employee>` elements we will create `Employee` objects, using `EmployeeBinding` coded earlier.<br>
on `<manager>` element end, we relate `company` and `manager` objects using `setManager(...)` method<br>
on `<employee>` element end, we relate `company` and `employee` objects using `addEmployee(...)` method

Let us implmennt `CompanyBinding`:
{{{
@Binding("company")
public class CompanyBinding{
    @Binding.Start
    public static Company onStart(@Attr String name) throws SAXException{
        return new Company(name);
    }

    @Binding.Element(element = "manager", clazz = EmployeeBinding.class)
    public static void onManager(){}

    @Relation.Finish("manager")
    public static void relateManager(Company company, Employee manager){
        company.setManager(manager);
    }

    @Binding.Element(element = "employee", clazz = EmployeeBinding.class)
    public static void onEmployee(){}

    @Relation.Finish("employee")
    public static void relateEmployee(Company company, Employee employee){
        company.employees.add(employee);
    }
}
}}}
Let us walk through the code:
{{{
@Binding.Start
public static Company onStart(@Attr String name) throws SAXException{
    return new Company(name);
}
}}}
`@Attr` annotation is used to get attribute value.<br>
the attribute name is derived from the parameter name.<br>
i.e, `@Attr String name` will give value of attribute `name`<br>

in some cases, attribute name may not be valid java identifier.<br>
for example `param-name` is a valid attribute name, but not a valid java identifier. <br>
in such cases you can do:
{{{
@Attr("param-name") String paramName
}}}

{{{
@Binding.Element(element = "manager", clazz = EmployeeBinding.class)
public static void onManager(){}
}}}
`@Binding.Element(element = "manager", clazz = EmployeeBinding.class)` annotation says to reuse `EmployeeBinding` for `<manager>` element.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
===Namespace Support===
{{{
@NamespaceContext({
    @Entry(prefix="foo", uri="http://www.foo.com"),
    @Entry(prefix="bar", uri="http://www.bar.com")
})
@Binding("foo:employee")
public class EmployeeBinding{
    ...
}
}}}

`@NamespaceContext` annotation is used to define prefix to namespace mappings.<br>
then you can use these prefixes in remaining annotations. for example:
{{{
@Binding("foo:employee")
}}}

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
===When no-arg constructor is missing===

Let us say our `Employee` has no default constructor:
{{{
public class Employee{
    private String name;
    private int age;
    private int experience;

    public Employee(String name, int age, int experience){
        this.name = name;
        this.age = age;
        this.experience = experience;
    }

    // getter methods
}
}}}
Let us see how to handle this situation:
{{{
        XML                     |     Java Object                                                     |   Relation
--------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------
<employee>                      |                                                                     |
    <name>scott</name>          | name = new String(#text)                                            | parent[<name>] = name
    <age>20</age>               | age = new String(#text)                                             | parent[<age>] = age
    <experience>5</experience>  | exp = new String(#text)                                             | parent[<experience>] = exp
</employee>                     | emp = new Employee(current[<name>], current[<age>], [<experience>]) | 
}}}

Notice that now we are creating `Employee` object in `<employee>` element end, rather than `<employee>` element begin.<br>
This is because, the values of name, age and experience are available only on `<employee>` element end.<br>

Earlier, the relation for `<name>`, `<age>` and `<experience>` used to call respective set method on `Employee` object.<br>
Now we can't do that, because we don't have `Employee` created by that time.

For each element in xml document, a [http://code.google.com/p/jlibs/source/browse/trunk/xml/src/jlibs/xml/sax/binding/SAXContext.java SAXContext] is maintained by `BindingHandler`.<br>
This context is used to store the java object you created for that element.<br>
`SAXContext.object` gives the object you have created. 

Other than that, `SAXContext` also has map, which you can use to store values temporarly which are required to create the java object later.<br>
`SAXContext.temp` is that map. here key is `QName` and value is any `Object`.

let us see the relation for `<name>` element:
{{{
parent[<name>] = name
}}}
here `parent` refers to parent element's (i,e `<employee>`) context;<br>
we are storing the `String` object created for `<name>` element, in `<employee>`'s context.<br>
here the key used is the qname name of current element i.e `<name>`

similarly we are saving the values of `<age>` and `<experience>` elements also in `<employees>`'s context.

now on `<employee>` element end we do:
{{{
emp = new Employee(current[<name>], current[<age>], [<experience>])
}}}
here `current` refers to current element's (i.e `<employee>`) context;<br>
we are retriving the values of `<name>`, `<age>` and `<experience>` stored earlier, and creating `Employee` object using them.

Let us see what it looks like in java code:
{{{
@Binding("employee")
public class EmployeeBinding{
    @Binding.Text({"name", "age", "experience"})
    public static String onText(String text){
        return text;
    }

    @Relation.Finish({"name", "age", "experience"})
    public static String relateWithEmployee(String value){
        return value;
    }

    @Binding.Finish
    public static Employee onFinish(@Temp String name, @Temp String age, @Temp String experience) throws SAXException{
        return new Employee(name,
                Integer.parseInt(age==null ? "0" : age),
                Integer.parseInt(experience==null ? "0" : experience)
        );
    }
}
}}}
Let us walk through the code;
{{{
@Relation.Finish({"name", "age", "experience"})
public static String relateWithEmployee(String value){
    return value;
}
}}}
`@Relation.Finish({"name", "age", "experience"})` annotation says that, call this method on<br>
`<name>`, `<age>` and `<experience>` element end.

When a method with relation annotation returns something:
 * the returned value is stored in parent element's temp with current element's qname as key
 * the first argument will be the object created for the current element.

i.e `String value` is the `String` object created for current element.<br>
and the value returned is stored in `<employee>` element's temp.

{{{
@Binding.Finish
public static Employee onFinish(@Temp String name, @Temp String age, @Temp String experience) throws SAXException{
    return new Employee(name,
            Integer.parseInt(age==null ? "0" : age),
            Integer.parseInt(experience==null ? "0" : experience)
    );
}
}}}
`@Binding.Finish` annotation says that, call this method on `<employee>` element end.<br>

`@Temp String name` says that give me the value mapped to `name` in current element's temp.<br>
similar to `@Attr` you can explicitly specify the qname as follows:
{{{
@Temp("name") String employeeName
}}}

Here in `onFinish(...) method, we are creating `Employee` object using the values that are stored earlier in temp, and returning it.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
===Recursive Bindings===
Let us say we have `Component` class:
{{{
public class Component{
    public final String name;
    public Properties initParams = new Properties();
    public List<Component> dependencies = new ArrayList<Component>();

    public Component(String name){
        this.name = name;
    }
}
}}}
each component has:
 * name
 * init params
 * dependencies (list of components) i.e, we have recursion

Let us see sample xml:
{{{
        XML                                               |     Java Object                                                     |   Relation
----------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------
<component name="comp1">                                  | comp = new Company(@name)                                           |
    <init-param>                                          |                                                                     |
        <param-name>param1</param-name>                   | paramName = #text                                                   | parent[<param-name>] = paramName
        <param-value>value1</param-value>                 | paramValue = #text                                                  | parent[<param-value>] = paramValue
    </init-param>                                         | comp.initParams.put(current[<param-name>], current[<param-value>])  |
    <init-param>                                          |                                                                     |
        <param-name>param2</param-name>                   |                                                                     |
        <param-value>value2</param-value>                 |                                                                     |
    </init-param>                                         |                                                                     |
    <dependencies>                                        |                                                                     |
        <component name="comp2">                          | dependent = /* use Recursion */                                     |
            <init-param>                                  |                                                                     |
                <param-name>param3</param-name>           |                                                                     |
                <param-value>value3</param-value>         |                                                                     |
            </init-param>                                 |                                                                     |
            <dependencies>                                |                                                                     |
                <component name="comp3">                  |                                                                     |
                    <init-param>                          |                                                                     |
                        <param-name>param4</param-name>   |                                                                     |
                        <param-value>value4</param-value> |                                                                     |
                    </init-param>                         |                                                                     |
                </component>                              |                                                                     |
            </dependencies>                               |                                                                     |
        </component>                                      |                                                                     | comp.dependencies.add(dependent)
    </dependencies>                                       |                                                                     |
</component>                                              |                                                                     |
}}}
here we have recursion. `comp1` depends on `comp2` which in turn depends on `comp3`

let us the Binding implementation:
{{{
@Binding("component")
public class ComponentBinding{
    @Binding.Start
    public static Component onStart(@Attr String name){
        return new Component(name);
    }

    @Binding.Text({ "init-param/param-name", "init-param/param-value" })
    public static String onParamNameAndValue(String text){
        return text;
    }

    @Relation.Finish({"init-param/param-name", "init-param/param-value"})
    public static String relateParamNameAndValue(String content){
        return content;
    }

    @Relation.Finish("init-param")
    public static void relateParam(Component comp, @Temp("param-name") String paramName, @Temp("param-value") String paramValue){
        comp.initParams.put(paramName, paramValue);
    }

    @Binding.Element(element="dependencies/component", clazz=ComponentBinding.class)
    public static void onDependecy(){}

    @Relation.Finish("dependencies/component")
    public static void relateDependency(Component comp, Component dependent){
        comp.dependencies.add(dependent);
    }
}
}}}
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
===Storing List of values in temp===
{{{
public class Employee{
    public String name;
    public int age;
    public int experience;
    public String contacts[];

    public Employee(String name, int age, int experience){
        this.name = name;
        this.age = age;
        this.experience = experience;
    }
}
}}}
{{{
        XML                                     |     Java Object                              |   Relation
------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|----------------------------
<employee name="scott" age="20" experience="5"> | emp = new Employee(@name, @age, @experience) |
    <contacts>                                  |                                              |
        <email>scott@yahoo.com</email>          | email = #text                                | parent[<email>] += email
        <email>scott@google.com</email>         | email = #text                                | parent[<email>] += email
        <email>scott@msn.com</email>            | email = #text                                | parent[<email>] += email
    </contacts>                                 |                                              | emp.contacts = current[<email>]
</employee>                                     |                                              |
}}}

notice that the relation for `<email>` element end is:
{{{
parent[<email>] += email
}}}
here '+=' means add to temp (i.e don't replace existing value)<br>
that is, `parent[<email>]` value is a list of strings rather than string

the relation for `<contacts>` element end is:
{{{
emp.contacts = parent[<email>]
}}}
i.e we are assigning the list of emails from current element's temp int `emp.conctacts`

Let us see the java code:
{{{
@Binding("employee")
public class EmployeeBinding{
    @Binding.Start
    public static Employee onStart(@Attr String name, @Attr String age, @Attr String experience){
        return new Employee(name,
                age!=null ? Integer.parseInt(age) : 0,
                experience!=null ? Integer.parseInt(experience) : 0
        );
    }

    @Binding.Text("contacts/email")
    public static String onText(String text){
        return text;
    }

    @Relation.Finish("contacts/email")
    public static @Temp.Add String relateEmail(String email){
        return email;
    }

    @Binding.Finish("contacts")
    public static void onFinish(Employee emp, @Temp("email") List<String> emails){
        emp.contacts = emails.toArray(new String[emails.size()]);
    }
}
}}}
let us walk through the code:
{{{
@Relation.Finish("contacts/email")
public static @Temp.Add String relateEmail(String email){
    return email;
}
}}}
`@Temp.Add` on return type says that, add the returned value to the existing value.<br>
i.e we want to save it as list of emails

{{{
@Binding.Finish("contacts")
public static void onFinish(Employee emp, @Temp("email") List<String> emails){
    if(emails!=null)
        emp.contacts = emails.toArray(new String[emails.size()]);
}
}}}
notice the second argument. It is mapped to `@Temp("email")` and its type is `List<String>`
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
===Comparision with existing Binding Frameworks===
Most of java-xml binding implementations provide two way support.<br>
 * serializing domain object to xml<br>
 * serializing xml to domain object. 

But JLibs implementation is only one way. that is "deserializing xml to domain object".<br>
to serialize xml to domain object, you can use `XMLDocument`

the main advantages of JLibs implementation:
 * works with hand-coded domain objects 
   
   most binding implementations mandate that domain objects has to be generated<br>
   from schema or dtd. They don't work with hand-coded domain objects 

 * domain objects are not tied to binding implementation 

   domain objects dont need to extend/implement a particular class/interface from binding implementation.<br>
   for example,
    * XMLBeans mandates that all domain objects implement `org.apache.xmlbeans.XmlObject`<br> 
    * Similarly EMF mandates that all domain objects implement `EObject` interface<br> 

 * domain objects are light-weight. i.e not poluted with binding implementation specific information 

   for example: the domain objects created by XMLBeans or EMF carry lot of information which are specific<br> 
   to them. This will bloat up memory. 

 * easier migration. 

    let us say in version 2 of your project, you want to change the structure of xml how it looks like, and still wants to provide backward<br> 
    compatibility to end-users. 

    This is tedious task with other binding frameworks. With JLibs you can have different Binding implementations<br> 
    for a domain object and use appropriate one at runtime based on version of xml document. 

 * clear separation of binding and domain object
 * in jlibs, it is like a callback methods. 
 
   callback methods can define when it has to be called and what information from xml document you want. <br>
   You have complete control how to consume that information into domain object (because you are implementing it in java code) 

 * The runtime memory used by jlibs binding is minimal and no reflection api is used. The number of `SAXContext` is equal to the maximum element depth of the xml document. 

JLibs binding implementation more of resembels [http://commons.apache.org/digester/ Apache's Commons-Digestor] but without reflection


===Your Feedback is valuable===